Chapter 15
腐蚀 and 应力腐蚀ribed as the destruction or deterioration of a metal or
alloy by way of a chemical or electrochemical reaction with its environment. It can
be considered as 萃取冶金 in reverse, or the process by which a metal is
returned to its natural state—an oxide. 腐蚀 can occur in wet (aqueous)
environments and also in dry (gaseous) environments, and can occur at a high rate
or a very slow rate. It can also take many forms, as discussed in the next section.
Nearly, all metallic corrosion processes involve the transfer of 电荷
in aqueous solutions. Consider the corrosion of zinc in 盐酸 (HCl) acid. Zinc
reacts with the acid to form soluble 氯化锌 and liberates hydrogen bubbles at
the surface. It occurs by two reactions. The first is the oxidation of Zn to Zn++ and
the liberation of 2 electrons, and the second is the combination of the two electrons
with 2 hydrogen ions to yield 2 hydrogen atoms or H2. The reactions are as follows:
Zn ! Znþþ þ2e" ð15:1Þ
2Hþ þ2e" ! H2; ð15:2Þ
for a total reaction described by:
Zn þ2HCl ! ZnCl2 þH2 ð15:3Þ
or in ionic form:
Znþ2Hþ þ2Cl" ! Znþþ þ2Cl" þH2: ð15:4Þ
The reaction in Eq. (15.1) is the 阳极, or 氧化反应 in which the valence
of Zn increases from 0 to +2 and liberates electrons. The reaction in Eq. (15.2) is the
阴极, or 还原反应 in which the oxidation state of H decreases from +1
to 0 by consuming electrons. Water is the carrier of ions, or the 电解质. Note
that the reactions shown in Eqs. (15.1) and (15.2) can occur simultaneously on the
surface of a piece of Zn immersed in HCl. These reactions involve the transfer of
charge or current. The relationship between current and mass of the reacting metal,
M, is given by Faraday’s law:
© Springer Science+Business Media New York 2017
G.S. Was, Fundamentals of Radiation Materials Science,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-3438-6_15
857
M ¼ kIt; ð15:5Þ
where I is the current (amperes, A), t is the time (s), and k is the electrochemical
当量 (g/库仑 or g/C) given by:
k ¼ A=nF; ð15:6Þ
where A is the 原子质量, n is the number of 当量s exchanged, and F is
Faraday’s constant (96,500 C/eq). Recall that a 库仑 is the amount of charge
transferred by a current of one ampere for 1 s. Hence, the 腐蚀速率 of a metal is
directly related to its 反应速度 with the environment.
This chapter will focus on the fundamentals of 水溶液腐蚀 by virtue of its
importance in water reactor systems, and provide a foundation for understanding
the interplay between corrosion and irradiation in the degradation of metals and
alloys treated in Chap. 16. It begins with a description of the various forms of
corrosion followed by the 热力学 of corrosion including the use of
potential–pH or 普尔贝图s, 腐蚀动力学, 钝化, 缝隙腐蚀,
and then stress corrosion cracking. The latter two topics provide a basis for
understanding the processes of 辐照加速腐蚀 (IAC) and
辐照诱发应力腐蚀断裂 (IASCC).
15.1 Forms of 腐蚀
While corrosion is most often envisioned as the loss of metal from a surface
exposed to the 电解质, corrosion can take many forms as summarized in
Fig. 15.1. The eight forms of corrosion include 均匀腐蚀, 缝隙腐蚀,
点蚀, 晶间损伤or 脱合金化, 冲蚀,
stress corrosion cracking, and 氢致损伤.
Uniform corrosion
Uniform corrosion is characterized by a reaction that proceeds uniformly over the
entire surface of the component, e.g., rusting of iron or tarnishing of silver. Various
units are used to describe the uniform removal of metal, such as the 减薄速率 in
mm/yr or the 质量损失 per unit area in g/m2yr. Uniform corrosion is not really
uniform on a 微观 level. In fact, the orientation of grain faces on the surface
will determine which corrodes the fastest. As grains dissolve away, preferential
sites for 损伤 will alternate. All other forms of corrosion can be broadly classified
as 局部腐蚀.
Crevice corrosion
Crevice corrosion is characterized by intense 局部腐蚀 that occurs most
frequently within crevices or 被遮盖区域 on metal surfaces exposed to corrosives.
The 损伤 is usually associated with small volumes of 静止溶液.
858 15 腐蚀 and 应力腐蚀m Blister
Surface cracks
Internal voids
Galvanic
Intergranular
Active Noble
Crevice Dealloying
Layer Plug
Pitting
Erosion
Cavitation Fretting
应力腐蚀igue 氢致断裂
Fig. 15.1 Eight forms of corrosion (after [2])
15.1 Forms of 腐蚀 859